Opening the streams: modes
r --> open mode: read

the stream will be opened in read mode;
the file associated with the stream must exist and has to be readable, 
otherwise the open() function raises an exception.

w --> open mode: write

the stream will be opened in write mode;
the file associated with the stream doesn't need to exist; 
if it doesn't exist it will be created; if it exists, 
it will be truncated to the length of zero (erased); 
if the creation isn't possible (e.g., due to system permissions) 
the open() function raises an exception.

a --> open mode: append

the stream will be opened in append mode;
the file associated with the stream doesn't need to exist; if it doesn't exist, 
it will be created; if it exists the virtual recording head 
will be set at the end of the file (the previous content of the file remains untouched.)

r+ --> open mode: read and update

the stream will be opened in read and update mode;
the file associated with the stream must exist and has to be writeable, 
otherwise the open() function raises an exception;
both read and write operations are allowed for the stream.

w+ --> open mode: write and update

the stream will be opened in write and update mode;
the file associated with the stream doesn't need to exist; if it doesn't exist, 
it will be created; the previous content of the file remains untouched;
both read and write operations are allowed for the stream.


Selecting text and binary modes
If there is a letter b at the end of the mode string it means that the stream 
is to be opened in the binary mode.

If the mode string ends with a letter t the stream is opened in the text mode.

Text mode is the default behaviour assumed when no binary/text mode specifier is used.

Finally, the successful opening of the file will set the current file position 
(the virtual reading/writing head) before the first byte of the file if the mode 
is not a and after the last byte of file if the mode is set to a.


Text mode	Binary mode	Description
    rt	        rb	      read
    wt	        wb	      write
    at	        ab	      append
    r+t	        r+b	      read and update
    w+t         w+b	      write and update


EXTRA

You can also open a file for its exclusive creation. 
You can do this using the --> x <-- open mode. 
If the file already exists, the open() function will raise an exception.